#Wiki documentation for pyConTextNLP, a partial implementation in Python of the ConText algorithm.

= Introduction =

pyConTextNLP is a partial implementation of the ConText algorithm using Python. The original description of  pyConTextNLP was provided in Chapman BE, Lee S, Kang HP, Chapman WW, "Document-level classification of CT pulmonary angiography reports based on an extension of the ConText algorithm." [http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046411000621  J Biomed Inform. 2011 Oct;44(5):728-37].


Other publications/presentations based on pyConText include:
  * Wilson RA, et al. "Automated ancillary cancer history classification for mesothelioma patients from free-text clinical reports." J Pathol Inform. 2010 Oct 11;1:24.
  * Chapman BE, Lee S, Kang HP, Chapman WW. Using ConText to Identify Candidate Pulmonary Embolism Subjects Based on Dictated Radiology Reports. (Presented at AMIA Clinical Research Informatics Summit 2011)
  * Wilson RA, Chapman WW, DeFries SJ, Becich MJ, Chapman BE. Identifying History of Ancillary Cancers in Mesothelioma Patients from Free-Text Clinical Reports. (Presented at AMIA 2010).

Note: we changed the package name from pyConText to pyConTextNLP because of a name conflict on pypi.

= Installation  =
pyConTextNLP can be downloaded from the Downloads page here on the negex Google Code project. Alternatively, it can be downloaded from the pypi repository http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyConTextNLP. Since pyConTextNLP is registered with pypi, it can be installed with easy_install:

  sudo easy_install pyConTextNLP

The only listed dependency is NetworkX and easy_install should also install this for you, if it is not already installed. However, there is optional functionality that is dependent on pygraphviz. I do not yet have this worked into the setuptools script.

= Code Structure =
The original code used in the JBI is in the top level pyConTextNLP package. A simplification of this original algorithm that uses [http://networkx.lanl.gov/ NetworkX] is in the subpackage pyConTextNLP.pyConTextGraph. pyConTextGraph is what is currently being developed by us and is what is described here.

The package has three files
  * *itemData.py*. This is where the essential domain knowledge is stored in 4-tuples as described in the paper. For a new application, this is where the user will encapsulate the domain knowledge for their application.
  * *pyConTextGraph.py*. This module defines the algorithm
  * *pyConTextSql.py*. 

= How to Use =
I am working on improving the documentation and (hopefully) adding some testing to the code. epydoc generated documentation for the current release (0.3.0) is available [http://quiil.ucsd.edu/pyConTextNLP/0.3.0/ here] and the epydoc generated documentation for the latest version in the subversion repository will be available [http://quiil.ucsd.edu/pyConTextNLP/current here].

Some preliminary comments:

 * pyConTextNLP works marks up text on a sentence by sentence level. 
 * pyConTextNLP facilitates reasoning from multi-sentence documents, but the markup (e.g. negation is all limited within the scope of a sentence.
 * pyConTextNLP assumes the sentence is a string not a list of words

== The Skeleton of an Example ==